<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Debates in the Digital Humanities 2016</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="ump6.css"/>
    <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/xml; charset=utf-8"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div id="contrib" class="chapter">
      <h1 class="cn"><a id="p572" class="page"></a><a id="p573" class="page"></a><a class="xref" href="ump-golddebates2016-0005.xhtml#toc">Contributors</a></h1>
      <p class="aubiof"><a class="page"></a><span class="dispk">Moya Bailey</span> is a postdoctoral scholar of women’s studies and digital humanities at Northeastern University. Her work focuses on marginalized groups’ use of digital media to promote social justice as acts of self-affirmation and health promotion.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Fiona Barnett</span> is completing her PhD at Duke University in the Literature and Women’s Studies Program. Her dissertation is <i>Bodies of Evidence: Postmortem Technologies of Race and Gender,</i> and her work is grounded in feminist theory, visual studies, and the digital humanities. She is also the director of HASTAC Scholars, an annual fellowship program for innovative students engaged in interdisciplinary projects, and is an active member of FemTechNet. </p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Matthew Battles</span> is associate director of metaLAB at Harvard, a research group at the Berkman Center for Internet and Society. His books include <i>Library: An Unquiet History</i> and <i>Palimpsest: A History of the Written Word.</i></p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Jeffrey M. Binder</span> is a PhD student in the English department at the Graduate Center, City University of New York. He teaches literature at Hunter College.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Zach Blas</span> is an artist and writer whose work engages technology, queerness, and politics. He is lecturer in Visual Cultures at Goldsmiths, University of London.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Cameron Blevins</span> is an Andrew Mellon Postdoctoral Fellow at Rutgers University and received his PhD from Stanford University in 2015.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Sheila A. Brennan</span> is director of strategic initiatives at the Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media and research associate professor in the Department of History and Art History at George Mason University. She is codirector of <i>Histories of the National Mall.</i></p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Timothy Burke</span> is a professor of history at Swarthmore College. His specialty is modern African history. He is author of <i>Lifebuoy Men, Lux Women: Commodification, Consumption, and Cleanliness in Modern Zimbabwe</i> and the coauthor of <i>Saturday Morning Fever: Growing Up with Cartoon Culture</i>. </p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Rachel Sagner Buurma</span> is associate professor of English literature at Swarthmore College, where she works on Victorian literature and culture, the history of the novel, and the relation between literature and information science. Along with Jon Shaw, she codirects the Early Novels Database.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Micha Cárdenas</span> is an artist/theorist who creates and studies trans of color movement in digital media, where movement includes migration, performance, and mobility. cárdenas is assistant professor of interactive media design at the University of Washington, Bothell.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><a id="p574" class="page"></a><span class="dispk">Wendy Hui Kyong Chun</span> is professor and chair of Modern Culture and Media at Brown University. She has studied both systems design engineering and English literature, which she combines and mutates in her current work on digital media. She is author of <i>Control and Freedom: Power and Paranoia in the Age of Fiber Optics</i> and <i>Programmed Visions: Software and Memory</i>. </p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Tanya E. Clement</span> is assistant professor in the School of Information at the University of Texas at Austin. She has a PhD in English literature and language and an MFA in fiction. She has published on sound studies and DH, digital literacies and pedagogy in DH, and text mining and DH as well as feminist inquiry in information studies, data mining, and modernist literature in <i>Digital Humanities Quarterly,</i> <i>Information &#x26; Culture,</i> <i>Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, Literary and Linguistic Computing,</i> and <i>Texas Studies in Literature and Language.</i></p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Anne Cong-Huyen</span> is digital scholar at Whittier College’s Digital Liberal Arts Center and a former Mellon Postdoctoral Fellow in the Humanities and visiting assistant professor of Asian American studies at the University of California, Los Angeles. Her research interests include the literature and media of migration and labor, Asian American studies, globalization and neoliberalism, postcolonial studies, and transnationalism.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Ryan Cordell</span> is assistant professor of English at Northeastern University and a founding core faculty member of NULab for Texts, Maps, and Networks.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Tressie McMillan Cottom</span> is assistant professor of sociology at Virginia Commonwealth University. She is a faculty associate at the Berkman Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University and the author of <i>Lower Ed: How For-Profit Colleges Deepen Inequality.</i> She is a contributing editor at <i>Dissent.</i></p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Amy E. Earhart</span> is associate professor of English at Texas A&#x26;M University. She is the author of <i>Traces of the Old, Uses of the New: The Emergence of Digital Literary Studies</i> and coeditor of <i>The American Literature Scholar in the Digital Age</i>.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Domenico Fiormonte</span> is lecturer in sociology of communication and culture at the Department of Political Sciences, University of Roma Tre (Italy), where he has taught courses on communication theory, composition, new media, humanities computing, and digital philology. He is the author of <i>Scrittura e filologia nell’era digitale</i>.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Paul Fyfe</span> is associate professor at North Carolina State University in the English department and the Communication, Rhetoric, and Digital Media Program. He is also an Andrew W. Mellon Fellow in Critical Bibliography at Rare Book School. He is the author of <i>By Accident or Design: Writing the Victorian Metropolis</i>.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Jacob Gaboury</span> is assistant professor of digital media and visual culture in the Department of Cultural Analysis and Theory at Stony Brook University.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Kim Gallon</span> is assistant professor of history at Purdue University. She is director of the Black Press Research Collective and the Black Press Born-Digital Project.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><a id="p575" class="page"></a><span class="dispk">Alex Gil</span> is digital scholarship coordinator for the Humanities and History Division at Columbia University and one of the founders of the Studio@Butler, a technology atelier for faculty, students, and librarians.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Matthew K. Gold</span> is associate professor of English and digital humanities at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York. His collaborative digital humanities projects include the CUNY Academic Commons, Looking for Whitman, Commons In A Box, Social Paper, DH Box, and Manifold Scholarship. He edited <i>Debates in the Digital Humanities</i> (Minnesota, 2012) and, with Lauren F. Klein, coedits the Debates in the Digital Humanities book series.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Brian Greenspan</span> is associate professor in the Department of English and the doctoral program in Cultural Mediations at Carleton University. He is founding director of the Hyperlab, Carleton’s first digital humanities research center, cofounder of the Digital Rhetorics and Ethics Lab, and champion of Carleton’s Collaborative MA and BA (minor) programs in digital humanities.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Richard Grusin</span> is a professor of English and director of the Center for 21st Century Studies at the University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee. He is the author of <i>Culture, Technology, and the Creation of America’s National Parks</i> and editor of <i>The Nonhuman Turn</i> (Minnesota, 2015).</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Michael Hancher</span>, professor of English at the University of Minnesota, has written on Victorian writers and artists; intention and interpretation, speech-act theory, pragmatics, and the law; and the history and rationale of pictorial illustration in dictionaries.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Molly O’Hagan Hardy</span> received her PhD in English from the University of Texas at Austin. She is the digital humanities curator at the American Antiquarian Society in Worcester, Massachusetts. Her research examines debates around literary property and race in the eighteenth-century transatlantic world.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">David L. Hoover</span> is professor of English at New York University. His publications include <i>Digital Literary Studies: Corpus Approaches to Poetry, Prose, and Drama</i>, with Jonathan Culpeper and Kieran O’Halloran, and “Text Analysis,” in Ken Price and Ray Siemens, editors, <i>Literary Studies in the Digital Age: An Anthology</i>.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Wendy F. Hsu</span> is a researcher, strategist, and educator who engages with hybrid research and organizing agendas to examine the cultural dimensions of arts, technology, and civic experience. She has published on digital ethnography, sound-based pedagogy, Asian American indie rock, Yoko Ono, Taqwacore, and Bollywood.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Patrick Jagoda</span> is assistant professor of English and an affiliate of cinema and media studies at the University of Chicago. He is coeditor of <i>Critical Inquiry</i> and cofounder of the Game Changer Chicago Design Lab. His first monograph, <i>Network Aesthetics,</i> is forthcoming.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Jessica Marie Johnson</span> is assistant professor of history at Michigan State University. In 2008 she founded African Diaspora, PhD, a blog highlighting scholarship of Atlantic African diaspora history.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><a id="p576" class="page"></a><span class="dispk">Steven E. Jones</span> is professor of English and director of the Center for Textual Studies and Digital Humanities at Loyola University, Chicago. He is the author of a number of books, including <i>The Emergence of the Digital Humanities</i>.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Lauren F. Klein</span> is assistant professor in the School of Literature, Media, and Communication at Georgia Tech, where she also directs the Digital Humanities Lab. With Matthew K. Gold, she coedits the Debates in the Digital Humanities book series.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Anna Tione Levine</span> is media associate at the Folger Shakespeare Library, where she works on Folger-supported digital humanities projects.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Margaret Linley</span> is associate professor of English at Simon Fraser University. She has published on Victorian poetry, literary annuals, and Victorian print culture and media history. She is coeditor of <i>Media, Technology, and Literature in the Nineteenth Century: Image, Sound, Touch.</i></p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Alan Liu</span> is a professor of English at the University of California, Santa Barbara. His books include <i>Wordsworth: The Sense of History</i>; <i>The Laws of Cool: Knowledge Work and the Culture of Information</i>; and <i>Local Transcendence: Essays on Postmodern Historicism and the Database</i>.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Elizabeth Losh</span> is associate professor of English and American studies at the College of William and Mary. She is author of <i>The War on Learning: Gaining Ground in the Digital University</i> and <i>Virtualpolitik</i>.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Alexis Lothian</span> is assistant professor of women’s studies and member of the core faculty in the interdisciplinary Design | Cultures &#x26; Creativity Honors Program at University of Maryland College Park. Her work focuses on the intersections of digital media, speculative fiction, and social justice movements and has been published in <i>International Journal of Cultural Studies, Cinema Journal, Camera Obscura, Social Text Periscope, Journal of Digital Humanities, Extrapolation,</i> and by the feminist science fiction publisher Aqueduct Press.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Michael Maizels</span> is the Mellon Curator of New Media Art at the Davis Museum at Wellesley College and a fellow at Harvard University’s metaLAB. He is author of <i>Barry Le Va: The Aesthetic Aftermath</i> (Minnesota, 2015).</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Mark C. Marino</span> is an author and scholar of digital literature. His works include “Marginalia in the Library of Babel,” “a show of hands,” “Living Will,” and a collection of interactive children’s stories called “Mrs. Wobbles and the Tangerine House.” He is associate professor (teaching) of writing at the University of Southern California, where he directs the Humanities and Critical Code Studies (HaCCS) Lab.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Anne B. McGrail</span> teaches writing and literature at Lane Community College. In 2013 she was project director for an NEH Digital Humanities Start-Up Grant for “Bringing Digital Humanities to the Community College and Vice Versa.” In summer 2015 she was project director for an NEH Advanced Topics in Digital Humanities Summer Institute for community college faculty.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Bethany Nowviskie</span> directs the nonprofit Digital Library Federation at CLIR, the Council on Library and Information Resources, and is research associate professor of digital humanities in the Department of English at the University of Virginia.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><a id="p577" class="page"></a><span class="dispk">Julianne Nyhan</span> is senior lecturer (associate professor) in digital information studies in the Department of Information Studies, University College London. Her research interests are the history of computing in the humanities and digital humanities. Her publications include the coedited <i>Digital Humanities in Practice</i>; <i>Digital Humanities: A Reader</i>; and <i>Clerics, Kings, and Vikings: Essays on Medieval Ireland</i>.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Amanda Phillips</span> is the IMMERSE Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of California, Davis. Her research unites platform and software studies approaches with feminist, queer, and critical race theory, investigating specific video game design practices to understand how difference is produced and policed in gaming communities.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Miriam Posner</span> is the digital humanities program coordinator and a member of the core DH faculty at the University of California, Los Angeles. A film and media scholar by training, she frequently writes on the history of science and technology. She is a member of the executive council of the Association for Computers and the Humanities.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Rita Raley</span> is associate professor of English at the University of California, Santa Barbara. She is author of <i>Tactical Media</i> (Minnesota, 2009) and coeditor of the <i>Electronics Literature Collection,</i> Volume 2.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Stephen Ramsay</span> is Susan J. Rosowski Associate University Professor of English at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln and a fellow at the Center for Digital Research in the Humanities. He is the author of <i>Reading Machines: Toward an Algorithmic Criticism</i>.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Margaret Rhee</span> received her PhD from the University of California, Berkeley in ethnic studies with a designated emphasis in new media studies. She is visiting assistant professor in women’s and gender studies at the University of Oregon. She lives in Eugene and Los Angeles.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Lisa Marie Rhody</span>, previously associate director of research projects at the Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media at George Mason University, is now at the CUNY Graduate Center as deputy director of Digital Initiatives. Her scholarly interests span contemporary poetry, topic modeling, data visualization, and scholarly communication.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Roopika Risam</span> is assistant professor of English and English education at Salem State University. Her research examines the intersections of postcolonial, African American, and U.S. ethnic literatures and the role of digital humanities in mediating between them.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Stephen Robertson</span> is director of the Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media and professor in the Department of History and Art History at George Mason University. He is one of the creators of the site Digital Harlem: Everyday Life, 1915–1930 (digitalharlem.org).</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Mark Sample</span> is associate professor of digital studies at Davidson College. His teaching and research focuses on contemporary literature, new media, and video games. His examination of the representation of torture in video games appeared in <i>Game Studies.</i></p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Jentery Sayers</span> is assistant professor of English and cultural, social, and political thought, as well as director of the Maker Lab in the Humanities, at the University of Victoria. He works at the intersections of comparative media studies and digital humanities.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><a id="p578" class="page"></a><span class="dispk">Benjamin M. Schmidt</span> is assistant professor of history at Northeastern University and a member of the core faculty at the NULab for Texts, Maps, and Networks. His research interests are in the digital humanities and the intellectual and cultural history of the United States in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Scott Selisker</span> is assistant professor of English at the University of Arizona. He is author of <i>Human Programming: Brainwashing, Automatons, and American Unfreedom</i> (Minnesota, 2016).</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Jonathan Senchyne</span> is assistant professor of library and information studies and associate director of the Center for the History of Print and Digital Culture at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. His essays on the materiality of early American print culture appear in <i>Early African American Print Culture</i> and <i>Book History.</i> His research has been supported by fellowships from the National Endowment for the Humanities, the American Antiquarian Society, and the New York Public Library.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Andrew Stauffer</span> is associate professor of English at the University of Virginia, where he directs the digital scholarly initiative NINES (<a class="url" href="http://nines.org">http://nines.org</a>), teaches in the Rare Book School, and directs the Book Traces project (<a class="url" href="http://booktraces.org">http://booktraces.org</a>). He is the author of <i>Anger, Revolution, and Romanticism</i> and the editor of works by H. Rider Haggard and Robert Browning.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Joanna Swafford</span> is assistant professor of English at SUNY New Paltz, specializing in Victorian literature and culture, digital humanities, sound, and gender studies. Her book project, “Transgressive Tunes and the Gendered Music of Victorian Poetry,” traces the gendered intermediations of poetry and music.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Toniesha L. Taylor</span> is associate professor in the Department of Languages and Communication at Prairie View A&#x26;M University. Her research focuses on African American, religious, intercultural, gender, and popular culture communications.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Dennis Tenen</span> pursues research at the intersection of people, texts, and technology. His recent work appears in <i>Computational Culture, boundary 2,</i> and <i>Modernism/Modernity</i> on topics that range from book piracy to algorithmic composition, unintelligent design, and the history of data visualization.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Melissa Terras</span> is director of the University College London Centre for Digital Humanities, a professor of digital humanities in UCL’s Department of Information Studies, and vice dean of research in UCL’s Faculty of Arts and Humanities. Her research focuses on computational techniques to enable research in the arts and humanities that would otherwise be impossible.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Ted Underwood</span> is a professor of English at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, and the author of <i>Why Literary Periods Mattered.</i></p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Ethan Watrall</span> is assistant professor in the Department of Anthropology and associate director of MATRIX: The Center for Digital Humanities &#x26; Social Sciences at Michigan State University. His primary research interests are publicly engaged digital archaeology and digital heritage.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><a id="p579" class="page"></a><span class="dispk">Jacqueline Wernimont</span> is assistant professor of English at Arizona State University, specializing in literary history, feminist digital media, histories of quantification, and technologies of commemoration. She is a fellow of the Lincoln Center for Applied Ethics and an active part of the FemTechNet collective.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Laura Wexler</span> is professor of American studies and women’s, gender, and sexuality studies at Yale University, where she is cochair of the Public Humanities Program, director of the Photographic Memory Workshop, and principal investigator of the Photogrammar Project.</p>
      <p class="aubio"><span class="dispk">Hong-An Wu</span> is a Taiwanese doctoral student in art education at the University of Illinois, Urbana–Champaign. Wu’s research investigates the intersection of art education and new media, with an emphasis on video gaming, through the lens of cultural studies, feminist studies, and critical Internet studies.</p>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>